Presides over the mess.
Presides over the mess.
Invisible-gives orders to staff-expects him to be carried out
Thinks a personal rewards, status, and how he or she looks to outsiders”
Uncomfortable with people.
No Manages by wandering around
In late-usually leaves on time
Strained with blue collars.
Good talker.
Good at demonstrating his command of all the complexities.
Hard to reach from below.
exploits the rest.
Arrogant.
Elusive-the artful dodger.
Only when his own goodies are at stake.
Complicates (makes it look difficult).
Intolerant of open disagreement
Doesn’t know people’s names
Vacillates when a decision is needed.
Above dog work.
Trusts only words and numbers on paper.
Keeps all final decisions.
Looks for a scapegoat.
A bad leader is identified by an ability to destroy the effectiveness of his team. He is that particularly bad manager who sucks the joy, life, energy and enthusiasm out of their organization. Instead of performing high quality work that adds value to the organization, he does uninspired mediocre work. Instead of providing great customer service that inspires customers to sing their praises, he does sloppy inattentive work that annoys their customers. These leaders are the arrogant, irritating, snarky people who make good people want to quit and move on, even though they like the company.

I have been in the military and business world for forty years and I often get asked what it takes to be a top line leader.  My experience leads me to an ability to recognizing both good and bad leaders. Here I will focus on the traits of bad leadership. Here is a list of the traits of leaders I would avoid at all costs.

If you want to be a more effective leader, with greater influence, work to avoid these traits:

Pessimism

People want to follow an optimist, a person always looking to prioritize and solve problems. Most people want to stay away from negative vibes at all costs. And leaders who allow problems to fester into big issues.

Not able to make decisions

A terrible leader lacks the ability to assess core issues of situations and quickly decide on a course of action. They struggle with decisiveness.

Lacking preparation

Most poor leaders are lazy and delegate 100% of the work. They are rarely prepared for anything and most often look hopeless.

Poor judge of character

Poor leaders avoid surrounding themselves with the talent that would make them look bad. They rarely if ever seek or listen to other people’s points of view.

No fearlessness

Fear is a crippling thing, especially to a terrible leader. It affects everything they do, most importantly their decision-making.

Avoid adversity

Poor leaders avoid controversy. Terrible leaders usually try and please the majority. They don’t stick to their guns or follow their heart.

Not trustworthy

Trust is a key element most bad leaders have a difficult time building in their teams. It is not built on words, but through actions and evidence which is most often missing.

Related post: Secrets to Becoming a Remarkably Mindful Leader

Use fights to reach consensus

Fights are emotional, often personal, disagreements which do not lead to consensus. They are frequently a tool for the terrible leader.

Avoid change

Bad leaders react to change rather than initiating change. They are always chasing after what they don’t understand. They rarely understand why change is necessary, and how it will make the situation better.

Non-communicators

Communication is the glue that forms the bond between leaders and teams, and holds great teams together. Poor leaders don’t communicate with their teams and don’t know when to speak and when to remain silent.

No listening

Poor leaders don’t want to hear what you have to say and are awful listeners because they are usually too wrapped up in themselves.

Lacking beliefs

Weak leaders rarely know themselves, what they believe in, or where they are going.

Lack personality

It’s not how smart you are like poor leaders think. It is strong personal relationships and high levels of trust that are the foundation of effective leadership. Terrible leaders rarely grasp this aspect of effective leadership. They lack empathy, any interest in others, and or good, solid relationships.

Faultless

Bad leaders never think anything is their fault and they never apologize because in their imaginary world they are never wrong.

Always telling what to do

Good leaders normally ask you to do something for them and only occasionally tell you what to do. Bad ones never ask, they always tell. And they demand that you to stop whatever you are doing to get it done for them regardless of what elsey ou have to do.

Creates bad teamwork culture

Poor leaders create a culture of infighting and back biting sabotage of the team’s effort.
1. There Are Silos And Conflicts Between Departments 

A lack of productivity and fighting among employees and departments are symptoms of poor leadership at the top. Without a cohesive leadership team at the top, dysfunction cascades throughout the department, division and organization. Leaders at the top must create a healthy team, where there is real trust, robust debate of ideas, commitment to decisions, accountability and a focus on results. - Christine Allen, Ph.D, Insight Business Works 

2. Leader Is Closed To New Perspectives 

A leader who is closed off to taking new perspectives is a leader who isn't growing their team. The first step to take with this person is to work with them to get clear on their commitment to their growth and to their impact on the world. When a leader takes a step back to look at their big picture, it can help them refocus on how they need to show up as a leader. - Aaron Levy, Raise The Bar Consulting 

3. Employee Attrition Is High 

A high rate of attrition is a leading indicator of troubled leadership. Employees leave when their needs are not served — it's that simple. Make your people managers responsible for retention and engagement by building these tools into their everyday roles; tie them to their year-end reviews and bonuses. Ensure they are empowered through training, resources, time, tools and support from the C-suite.
. No One Is Asking Questions 

If your team is quiet — they aren't asking questions or bringing problems to your attention — your leadership is having a negative effect on them. To tackle this, change the way you start inquiries: Use open-ended questions versus closed-ended ones. Bring up the elephants in the room during discussions and use silence to "push" people to speak. Crickets means you are stopping the conversation. - Leila Bulling Towne, The Bulling Towne Group, LLC 

8. Accidents Aren't Allowed 

A leader focused on perfection can create unrealistic workloads and dismiss teachable moments for productivity. Take time to focus on the delegation of work and improve processes for better-shared performance. Create a safe place for feedback and rebalancing the responsibilities with input from the team. A positive leader harvests the potential from mistakes. - Meredith Moore Crosby, Leverette Weekes 

9. Compassion Is Lacking 

Many ineffective leaders do not understand that great leadership is about influence and not authority. Therefore, one of the things that is missing is a true sense of compassion. If you want others to voluntarily follow you, prove to them that you are passionate about them and their interests. Some of the best leaders care as much, or even more, about their followers than they do themselves. - Donald Hatter, Donald Hatter Inc. 

10. People Are Ducking And Covering 

If employees are spending more time ducking and covering, they are not spending time bringing their creativity and engagement to the table. We see this "duck-and-cover" behavior when a negative leadership culture is present that is based in control, a lack of trust and the assumption that without forced accountability, employees will not bring their "A" game. 