I am guided by the divine and I am where I am supposed to be,
My life is wonderful gift and I must enjoy it,I look amazing and my smile is the best dress,
I am in full control of what I eat,My body is a sacred place and I’ll keep it clean and in shape,
My job provides financial stability that my family needs,I love what I do,I do what I am good at,
I am blessed with financial abundance,I am the best at what I do,I love and accept myself for who I am.
I radiate and receive love and respect.
I am loved and respected wherever I go.
I am unique in my talents and abilities and do not validation from others.
People see value in my services and I am rewarded graciously.
I am self-reliant, creative and persistent in whatever I do.
I deserve all that is good
I am grateful for all the wonderful things in my life
I am full of loving, healthy, positive and prosperous thoughts which eventually convert into my life experiences.
I am unique and my dreams and aspirations are unique to myself. I do not need to prove myself to anyone.
I am solution driven. Every problem is a chance to grow.
I am never alone in my pursuit of success. The universe supports me in expected and unexpected ways.
I am not a prisoner of the past and live only in the moment. That way I enjoy life to the fullest.
I am not a Tree and have the power to change myself how I see fit.
Only I am responsible for making my choices and decisions.
I am not selfish in giving priority to my desires.
Every moment brings us a choice and I choose happiness no matter what my circumstances.
I am flexible and open to new experiences.
I think positively and expect the best.
I am aware of my strength and act with confidence.
I can identify my skill gap and act on it.
Life is beautiful and rewarding.
Universe blesses me with health, happiness and abundance.
I appreciate the things I have. I rejoice in the love I receive.
I am courageous. My eyes reflect the strength of my soul.
I am positive and optimistic. The universe conspires to make me successful.
I am passionate about what I do and that reflects by the enthusiasm in my work.
I attract positive and helping people into my life.
I am open to meeting people and create positive and supportive relationships.
I radiate love and inspire people.
I am calm and peaceful.
I take time to enjoy the little joys of life.
I am in full control of my life and in complete harmony with the universe.
Firmly believe in certain values and principles, and are ready to defend them even when finding opposition, feeling secure enough to modify them in light of experience.
Are able to act according to what they think to be the best choice, trusting their own judgment, and not feeling guilty when others do not like their choice.
Do not lose time worrying excessively about what happened in the past, nor about what could happen in the future. They learn from the past and plan for the future, but live in the present intensely.
Fully trust in their capacity to solve problems, not hesitating after failures and difficulties. They ask others for help when they need it.
Consider themselves equal in dignity to others, rather than inferior or superior, while accepting differences in certain talents, personal prestige or financial standing.
Understand how they are an interesting and valuable person for others, at least for those with whom they have a friendship.
Resist manipulation, collaborate with others only if it seems appropriate and convenient.
Admit and accept different internal feelings and drives, either positive or negative, revealing those drives to others only when they choose.
Are able to enjoy a great variety of activities.
Are sensitive to feelings and needs of others; respect generally accepted social rules, and claim no right or desire to prosper at others' expense.
Can work toward finding solutions and voice discontent without belittling themselves or others when challenges arise.
Trust their own judgement, values and capacity to solve problems, do not feel guilty if others do not approve. Are ready to defend their principles but also feel confident enough to modify them or ask for help if needed.
Do not excessively worry about the past or the future but rather live in the present.
Accept individual differences while at the same time consider themselves equal in dignity to others (not superior nor inferior).
Understand that they are valuable and interesting, especially to those with whom they have friendships and relationships.
Are able to enjoy different activities, show less fear of failure.
Self-esteem is strongly related to how you view and react to the things that happen in your life. Suggestions for building self-esteem include:
Talk to yourself positively – treat yourself as you would your best friend. Be supportive, kind and understanding. Don’t be hard on yourself when you make a mistake.
Challenge negative ‘self-talk’ – every time you criticise yourself, stop and look for objective evidence that the criticism is true. (If you feel you can’t be objective, then ask a trusted friend for their opinion.) You’ll realise that most of your negative self-talk is unfounded.
Don’t compare yourself to others – recognise that everyone is different and that every human life has value in its own right. Make an effort to accept yourself, warts and all.
Acknowledge the positive – for example, don’t brush off compliments, dismiss your achievements as ‘dumb luck’ or ignore your positive traits.
Appreciate your special qualities – remind yourself of your good points every day. Write a list and refer to it often. (If you feel you can’t think of anything good about yourself, ask a trusted friend to help you write the list.)
Forget the past – concentrate on living in the here-and-now rather than reliving old hurts and disappointments.
Tell yourself a positive message everyday – buy a set of ‘inspirational cards’ and start each day reading out a new card and carrying the card’s message with you all day.
Stop worrying – ‘worry’ is simply fretting about the future. Accept that you can’t see or change the future and try to keep your thoughts in the here-and-now.
Have fun – schedule enjoyable events and activities into every week.
Exercise – it is such a good boost to the brain for all kinds of things but especially in combatting depression and helping you to feel good. Targets need to be step by step, such as starting with a walk round the block once a day, enrolling at a local gym class or going for a swim.
Be assertive – communicate your needs, wants, feelings, beliefs and opinions to others in a direct and honest manner.
Practise the above suggestions every day – it takes effort and vigilance to replace unhelpful thoughts and behaviours with healthier versions. Give yourself time to establish the new habits. Keep a diary or journal to chart your progress.
